# Gradient_Descent
Gradient Descent
The file "eat_time.xlsx" contains 80 sample observations (training data) on expenditure, number of members and time required for eating in minutes, for parties visiting a restaurant. The parameters of a multiple linear regression model, having expenditure as the dependent variable and an intercept term, time required for eating, and number of members as independent variables, are estimated first by gradient descent and then by OLS. The file "eat_time_test.xlsx" contains 20 sample observations (test data) which are used to assess the predictive power of both methods. The file "eat_time_GD2.ipynb" contains the results from using gradient descent on standardized values of the variables.
The file "eat_time_OLS2.ipynb" contains the results from using OLS on actual values of the variables. Predictions for actual values of expenditure are obtained for both methods. In both Python notebooks, in the 3D plot, red markers represent actual values of expenditure, and blue markers represent predicted values of expenditure. The time required for eating is plotted in the X-axis (having lower limit 0 and upper limit 50) in both diagrams. The number of family members is plotted in the Y-axis (having lower limit 0 and upper limit 10) in both diagrams. The RMSE for Gradient Descent comes as 353.12. The RMSE for OLS comes as 378.48. So parameters estimated by gradient descent have greater predictive power. The file "calc_eat.xlsx" contains the results of OLS applied to standardized values of the dependent and independent variables (in order to replicate the estimated parameters obtained by gradient descent). The values in cells M23, M24 and M25 of 'Sheet1' confirm that the values obtained by gradient descent are correct.
The file 'cigarette_consumption.xlsx' contains data on the sales per month (in '000s of packs) and price index for cigarettes, for 51 US states and territories. It also contains data on the median age of the population, percentage of the population having high school degree, median income of the population, percentage of Black population and percentage of female population. A multiple regression model is fitted taking Sales as the dependent variable, and an intercept term, price and squared value of price as the independent variables. The first 42 observations are the training data and the last 9 observations are the test data. First the parameters are estimated by OLS and then by Gradient Descent. The file 'cigarettes_7.ipynb' contains the results of the OLS estimation. The red markers in the graph are actual values and the blue markers are predicted values of Sales. The RMSE comes as 23.44. The file 'Sales_price.ipynb' contains the results of applying Gradient Descent to standardized values of the dependent and independent variables. The red markers in the graph are actual values and the blue markers are predicted values of Sales. The RMSE comes as 17.39. The file 'calc_cig.xlsx' contain the results of fitting OLS to standardized values of the variables. These confirm the results obtained by gradient descent.
